Add text about AstraZeneca vaccine to vaccines (#916)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/22.vaccines.md

It has been shown that electroporation can enhance vaccine efficacy by up to 100-fold, as measured by increases in antigen-specific antibody titers [@doi:10.1016/j.coi.2011.03.008].
The safety of the CELLECTRA® device has been studied for over seven years, and these studies support the further development of electroporation as a safe vaccine delivery method [@doi:10.4161/hv.24702].
The temporary formation of pores through electroporation facilitates the successful transportation of macromolecules into cells, allowing cells to robustly take up INO-4800 for the production of an antibody response.

> Approved by the United States (U.S.) FDA on April 6, 2020, the Phase I study is enrolling up to 40 healthy adult volunteers in Philadelphia, PA at the Perelman School of Medicine and at the Center for Pharmaceutical Research in Kansas City, MO.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Approved by the United States (U.S.) FDA on April 6, 2020, the phase I study is enrolling up to 40 healthy adult volunteers in Philadelphia, PA at the Perelman School of Medicine and at the Center for Pharmaceutical Research in Kansas City, MO.
```

### Viral Vector Vaccines

As discussed earlier, the delivery and presentation of antigens are key to inducing immunity against SARS-CoV-2.
Viral vectors have emerged as a safe and efficient method to deliver foreign substances into the body in a way that induces an efficient immune response [@doi:10.1128/CVI.00298-16].
Genetic material from the target virus of interest is delivered using a second virus as a vector.

> The vaccine then uses the host machinery to construct antigen(s) from the transported genetic material.

Author: I like it!

Both the innate and adaptive immune responses can potentially respond to the vector, limiting the ability of the vaccine to transfer information to the immune system [@doi:10.1038/gt.2009.148].
Different vectors are associated with different levels of reactogenicity; for example, adenoviruses elicit a much stronger innate immune response than replication deficient adeno-associated viruses derived from parvoviruses [@doi:10.1038/gt.2009.148].
Additionally, using a virus circulating widely in human populations as a vector presents additional challenges because vaccine recipients may already have developed an immune response to the vector [@doi:10.3390/vaccines2030624].

There are several viral vector vaccines that are available for veterinary use [@doi:10.3390/vaccines8040680], but prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, only one viral vector vaccine was approved by the FDA for use in humans.
This vaccine is vectored with a recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus and targeted against the ebola virus [doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.03.011].
Additionally, several phase I and phase II clinical trials for other vaccines are ongoing [@doi:10.1128/CVI.00298-16].

> This technology is currently being explored for its potential against numerous infectious diseases including malaria [@doi:10.1016/j.ymthe.2016.11.003; @doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2006.07.035], ebola [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1410863; @doi:10.1093/infdis/jir349; @doi:10.1586/14760584.2014.885841], human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) [@doi:10.1097/COH.0b013e328363d389; @doi:10.1016/j.virol.2014.09.004].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This technology is currently being explored for its potential against numerous infectious diseases including malaria [@doi:10.1016/j.ymthe.2016.11.003; @doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2006.07.035], ebola [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1410863; @doi:10.1093/infdis/jir349; @doi:10.1586/14760584.2014.885841] and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) [@doi:10.1097/COH.0b013e328363d389; @doi:10.1016/j.virol.2014.09.004].
```

> The prior MERS and SARS initiated interest in the application of viral vector vaccines to human coronaviruses [@doi:10.3390/v12080861], but efforts to apply this technology to these pathogens had not yet led to a successful vaccine candidate.

Reviewer 2: What initiated interest? prior epidemics? Or just that there was interest in using viral vectors for these viruses?

In the mid-to-late 00s, adenoviral vectored vaccines against SARS were found to induce SARS-CoV-specific IgA in the lungs of mice [@doi:10.1099/vir.0.81579-0], but were later found to offer incomplete protection in ferret models [@doi:10.1099/vir.0.2008/001891-0].
Around 2014, interest arose in utilizing simian adenoviruses as vectors because of the reduced risk that human vaccine recipients would have prior exposure resulting in adaptive immunity [@doi:10.1038/mt.2013.284], and chimpanzee adenoviruses were explored as a potential vector in the development of a vaccine against _Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus_ (MERS-CoV) [@doi:10.3390/v12080861].
In 2017, results were published from an initial investigation of two vaccine candidates against MERS-CoV containing the MERS-CoV S gene vectored with chimpanzee adenovirus, Oxford University #1 (ChAdOx1), a replication-deficient chimpanzee adenovirus [@doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.05.032].
This study reported that a candidate containing the complete spike protein sequence induced a stronger neutralizing antibody response in mice than candidates vectored with modified vaccinia virus Ankara.

> It was pursued in additional research, and in the summer of 2020 results of two studies were published.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Follow up studies were conducted in the summer of 2020.
```

The first reported that a single dose of ChAdOx1 MERS induced an immune response and inhibited viral repliaction in macaques [@doi:10.1126/sciadv.aba8399].

> The second reported  promising results from a phase 1 trial that administered the vaccine to adults and measured safety/tolerability and immune response (as indicated through immune assays following vaccination) [@doi:10/ggtxgp].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The second reported  promising results from a phase I trial that administered the vaccine to adults and measured safety/tolerability and immune response (as indicated through immune assays following vaccination) [@doi:10/ggtxgp].
```

While not all of these results were available at the time that vaccine development programs against SARS-CoV-2 began, viral vector vaccines have also been explored against this hCoV.
Here we review the current state of the art in recent efforts to develop viral vector vaccines against SARS-CoV-2.

> #### ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (Astra Zeneca)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (AstraZeneca)
```

Author: HAHA I looked this up and swore it had a space and now I looked it up again and you're definitely right!!!!

> A collaboration between Astra Zeneca and researchers at the University of Oxford has successfully applied a viral vector approach to the development of a vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 using the replcation-deficient ChAdOx1 vector modified to encode the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2608-y].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A collaboration between AstraZeneca and researchers at the University of Oxford has successfully applied a viral vector approach to the development of a vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 using the replcation-deficient ChAdOx1 vector modified to encode the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2608-y].
```

The _S_ protein is an antigen and induces an immune response [@doi:10/fmq2; @doi:10.3389/fimmu.2020.576622].
As discussed above, prior analyses of viral vector vaccines against hCoV had indicated that this approach showed potential for inducing an immune response, but little information was available about the effect on real-world immunity.
In the first phase of development, a candidate ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 was evaluated through the immune challenge of two animal models, mice and rhesus macaques [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2608-y].
Animals in the treatment condition were observed to develop neutralizing antibodies specific to SARS-CoV-2 (both macaques and mice) and to show reduced clinical scores when exposed to SARS-CoV-2 (macaques) [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2608-y].

> Next, a phase I/II trial was undertaken using a single blind, randomized controlled design [@doi:10/gg5gwk].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, a phase I/II trial was undertaken using a single-blind, randomized controlled design [@doi:10/gg5gwk].
```

ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 and a control, the meningococcal conjugate vaccine MenACWY, were administered intramuscularly to adults ages 18 to 55 at five sites within the United Kingdom (U.K.) at a 1:1 ratio (n=543 and n=534, respectively).
All but ten participants received a single dose; this small group received a booster 28 days after their first dose of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19. 
Commonly reported local adverse reactions included mild-to-moderate pain and tenderness at the injection site over the course of seven days, while the most common systemic adverse reactions were fatigue and headache; some patients reported severe advrse systemic effects.

> The study also reported that many common reactions could be reduced through the administration of paracetamol, and paracetamol was not found to reduce immunogenicity.

Author: haha probably! I forget people in the US don't know what that is! (I didn't either and I'm allergic, so that was a fun adventure 👍)

Patients reeiving the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine developed antibodies to the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein that peaked by day 28, with these levels remaining stable until a second observation at day 56 except in the ten patients who received a booster dose at day 28, in whom they increased by day 56.
Analysis of serum indicated that participants developed antibodies to both S and the RBD, and that 100% of them achieved neutralizing titers by day 28.
By day 35, the nutralization titer in vaccinated patients was comparable to that observed with plasma from convalescents.
This initial study therefore suggested that the vaccine was likely to confer protection against SARS-CoV-2, although analysis of its efficacy in preventing COVID-19 was not reported.

In December 2020, preliminary results of the phase III trial were released detailing randomized control trials conducted in the U.K., Brazil, and South Africa between April and November 2020 [@doi:10/fmq2].
These trials again compared ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 to a control, but the design of each study varied.

> For example, in South Africa, the trial was double blinded, whereas in the U.K. and Brazil it was single blinded, and one of the two trials carried out in the U.K. examined two dosing regimens (low dose or standard dose, both followed by standard dose).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, in South Africa, the trial was double-blinded, whereas in the U.K. and Brazil it was single-blinded, and one of the two trials carried out in the U.K. examined two dosing regimens (low dose or standard dose, both followed by standard dose).
```

Some of the trials used MenACWY as a control, while others used saline.
Data was pooled across countries for analysis.
The primary outcome assessed was symptomatic, laboratory-confirmed COVID-19.

> There were 131 cases observed among the 11,636 participants eligible for the primary efficacy analysis, corresponding to an overall efficacy of 70.4% (30 out of 5807 in the vaccine arm and 101 out of 5829 in the control arm); the 95.8% CI is reported as 54.8 to 80.6.

Author: I hope this is an appropriate level of shade for "why is this 95.8% when the rest are 95%? 👀 "

> However, a higher efficacy was reported in the subgroup of patients who received a low-dose followed by a standard dose (90.0%, 95% CI 67.4 to 97·0).

Reviewer 2: This is interesting

The U.K. Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency approved ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 for emergency use on December 30, 2020 [@url:https://www.astrazeneca.com/media-centre/press-releases/2020/astrazenecas-covid-19-vaccine-authorised-in-uk.html].
Additional data about the efficacy of this vaccine became available in a preprint released on March 2, 2021 [@doi:10.1101/2021.03.01.21252652].
This report provided data describing the efficacy of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19, along with Pfizer/BioNTech's BNT162b2, in the U.K. between December 8, 2020 and February 19, 2021 and specficially sought to evaluate the efficacy of the vaccine in the presence of a potentially more contagious variant of concern, B.1.1.7.
All participants in this study were age 70 or older and the efficacy was estimated to increase from 60% at 28 days after vaccination to 73% at 35 days after vaccination, although the standard error also increased over this time.
Therefore, preliminary results suggest that in a number of samples, this vaccine confers a high level of protection against SARS-CoV-2.

> <!--To Do: Add discussion of all the drama-->

Author: It's so sad!!! I was so excited about this one, I love the scientific backstory of the team at Oxford, and I'm so confused why AstraZeneca just went for the straight-chaos clinical trial strategy 😭

> <!--To Do: Add discussion of all the drama-->

Reviewer: So true :(
